---
title: Facebook cannot act in your best interest
published: True
category: blog
---

With the recent complaints about Facebook surfacing across the internet, now
seems as good of a time as ever to share this. I've discussed with friends
before that Facebook _cannot_ be acting in their best interest.

Now everyone agrees that Facebook is in the business of making money. That's
the entire purpose of for-profit enterprises. It's also not controversial to
say that Facebook makes its money by advertising.

Based on these two statements, we can say that to please shareholders Facebook
must show advertisements. In particular, they should show as many
advertisements as possible, in order to make as much money as possible.

In order sell more advertisements, Facebook must do one (or some combination)
of two things: acquire more users and show more advertisements to existing
users. With Facebook's already having a user base of billions of users, it is
less and less likely that Facebook can continue to drive growth by adding more
users in the future. So then to make more money, it must show more
advertisements to existing users.

Now in order to show more advertisements to existing users, you can either
increase the concentration of advertisements, or increase the amount of time
spent on it. Increasing the concentration of advertisements will drive away
some portion of users (as there is always some users at the margins, for whom
more ads would be the "straw that breaks the camels back"). So it is in
Facebook's interest to maintain their existing density of advertisements, and
instead have users spend more time on it.

We've established that Facebook wants people to spend as much time as possible
on it. At this point, I usually ask my friends about examples of where they
have spent more time than usual on Facebook. Often it comes back to some
impossible political argument, or family blow-up, or some other unpleasant
thing. These are the things that we ask Facebook to show us more of, by
spending more time looking at. The problem is that the things that draw our
attention --- anger, violence, fear --- are not the things that are good for us
to be immersed in.

