---
    title: Notes for an out-of-province student
    created: 2018-05-04 11:06 -5
    updated: 2018-05-04 11:06 -5
    published: True
    category: blog
    tags:
      - co-op
      - advice
...
## Working a co-op in BC when you've never left Ontario

Last year at the end of November, I got an offer to do a co-op placement with a
company in Vancouver. Starting January second. Short notice, but also exciting.

I had never lived outside of Ontario before. I did not know too much about
anything. So I started asking everyone I knew for advice. Friends, family,
friends-of-friends, everyone had something to say. It turns out, everyone has
advice. However not everyone has _good_ advice.

Having been there and back, I have written up some notes on what I found
useful.  Thanks goes to family, friends, friends-of-friends, and even strangers
that shared some of their knowledge.


## Before you go
### Gear up

The single best piece of advice I got was to buy a rain jacket. Already have
one?  Buy a _real_ rain jacket. The insistence at first seemed over the top. I
can now say however that they are worth every penny. It is not the intensity of
rain but the consistency of it that will soak through your regular old
"jacket". Gore-Tex is a beautiful thing. The ideal rain jacket should sound like
you are wearing a
[Sun Chips bag](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sun_Chips#Noise_complaints) at
first. Eventually it will break in and stop being so noisy. Eventually.

A close second to the rain jacket is a pair of waterproof shoes. Whether boots,
hiking shoes, or something else, you will be walking in the rain at some point.
There is absolutely nothing worse than wet feet. While I went with boots, I
would buy hiking shoes if I had to do it again.


### Housing

It is as bad as it sounds. Especially for co-op students, looking for a four or
eight month rental.  You really can not be picky. However you can still get an
okay place short notice. Thanks to UBC and Simon Fraser University being
nearby, there are a good amount of students living nearby, and you can usually
find an empty room. Yes, it will be more expensive than housing at school.

As important as distance for housing, keep an eye on what main lines you are
near. You can be twice as far, but if you are living on an express line you can
commute around the city very easily. Key areas are Main and Cambie streets, and
possibly Cornwall and 4th Ave. in Kitsilano.


### Packing

Bring less clothing. Moving out I packed a full 50 pounds of clothing, and in
retrospect that was too much. Even only four months is enough time to
accumulate new clothes, souvenirs, and all sorts of things. Pack less, and make
your way to a thrift store the first day or two after you move out.


### Cost

Finally, make peace with the fact that you will spend a fair bit of money. Not
just on housing and food, but also on all of the experiences that are so close
to you. When you can take public transit to skiing, it is very difficult to
justify not going. With Seattle so close, and Victoria even closer, you will
have many opportunities to spend money.


## Once you get there
### Transit

Buy a bicycle! Even though Vancouver already has world-class public transit,
having a bike lets you go so much further on your own terms.

Sign up for ZipCar. You rent cars by the minute, or by the day optionally. You
don't really need them for in Vancouver, but they are critical if you want to
do something further away for a day or even a weekend.


### Keep in touch

Make an effort to keep in touch with family or friends. While the time zones
are only three hours apart, that is enough to make a big difference. When
everyone is working before you even wake up, you have few chances to catch up
with others naturally. Plan some phone calls, skype chats, gaming sessions, or
whatever it is.


### Enjoy it!

Be a tourist. Do it shamelessly. The
[Lonely Planet Pocket Vancouver](https://shop.lonelyplanet.com/products/pocket-vancouver-2)
book is $20 and is worth every penny in my opinion. Even just to have it as a
reference of things to do nearby when you're wandering around the city is a
great resource. You don't have to do everything, or even anything in it. Often
finding a place the next door down from a recommended one is nearly as good,
and way more affordable.

Finally, plan big things in advance. It is easy to do things around the city
spontaneously, but you'll have to work around, well, work to make it happen.
Still, I say this because it is so, so worth it to go to Seattle or Victoria.

