---
    title: "Planning until it's painful"
    created: 2018-09-25 20:29 -7
    updated: 2018-09-25 20:29 -7
    published: True
    category: blog
    tags:
      - project
      - "work practices"
...

When I first started at my current internship, I just wanted to code. My
manager however would often ask me all these _annoying questions_ that just got
in the way of me programming.

_When will it be done?_

_What will you do if it takes longer?_

_How will you do that?_

These questions annoyed me mostly because I didn't know how to answer them.
Code is code and it just comes out of the brain, you can't plan around that!
However out of begrudging respect I would write out a minimal outline of what I
was doing, how long it would take, risks and contingencies. Whatever.

Then something weird happened. A while later, working on a project, I ran into
a problem. I had no idea how to deal with it. I was ready to keep fighting it,
spinning my wheels, when I remember that I had already knew what to do in this
situation. So I reached out to a co-worker with more domain knowledge than I,
and managed to get the project done within the timeline I had promised. Huh.

I now realize the benefit of planning ahead is never going to be that it makes
you faster at programming. If anything it slows me down. On starting a new
project I'm more likely to sit down now with pen and paper than with my
computer. However despite taking longer than ever to actually get started, I
spend less time than ever working. Instead of working towards an undefined goal
at an undefined time, I am working towards a deadline, with checks and
contingencies in place to ensure that I meet those deadlines.

I don't know how to do something?  I've already thought of who to ask or where
to look.

The task is more complex than I imagined?  The scope is already set up to cut
the least important parts.

The approach I've taken isn't working?  Switch to the contingency that's
already laid out.

It still isn't easy to plan when I'm fired up about a new project. Without
variance however, I can say that the projects I've planned have always gone
better than those I have not.

